 Hello guys and welcome to Python programming tutorials by Amulya's Academy. We were discussing about single-linked list and how to implement single-linked list in Python and we created the node class, linked list class and in that for the single-linked list operation we are writing the different methods. So we already wrote a method for traversal operation and we were discussing about insertion method in the previous tutorial. We already wrote a method to add the node in the beginning of the linked list at the end of the linked list in between that is before given node after the given node. Today we will discuss one more scenario in the insertion operation that is if I want to insert a node when the linked list is completely empty. So we are discussing about this scenario today. You can add or insert the node using these four methods begin and after before methods. But if you want to write a specific method to add the element when the linked list is empty then you can do that. So I will show you how to do that. So now to add the element to the empty linked list, the first step is you need to check linked list is empty or not. If it is empty then we will write the code. If it is not empty we will just print a message that is it is not empty. Here we want to add the node when the linked list is empty right. So to add this condition need to be satisfied in this method. Linked list should be empty here. If it is empty then that means head is pointing to none. So the first step here is create the node. Now the linked list doesn't contain any node. So create a node. We will get like this. And the second step is you need to point head to the new node. Store the reference of the new node in the head. That's it. So write this method first you need to check linked list is empty or not. So here we are writing this method to add the node when the linked list is empty. If it is not empty then I will just print a message that is linked list is not empty. If it is empty then create the node and point head to the new node. So let's write the program. So here we already have node class linked class in that print LL method add begin add after add before next here let's create insert when empty. So I'll take insert empty when the linked list is empty that time insert the node. So cells and here I need to take data because whenever you create a node you need data. Right. That's why. So here first step is we need to chuck linked list is empty or not. So to chuck linked list is empty or not we need to chuck head is none or not. So if cells dot head is none. If it is none that means linked list is empty. If it is empty then here we need to create the new node. So create new node using node class. We are creating the object from the node class and here you need to pass data. Here we have node class. So we are creating node using this class. Then here you need to point head to the new node store the reference of the new node in the head like this. That's it. If it is not empty else part if linked list is not empty then just print the message linked list is not empty. So here we wrote this method to insert the node when linked list is empty. If it is not empty we'll just print this message linked list is not empty. If it is empty then create the new node and store the reference of the new node in the head. So let's see whether it works properly or not. So we are creating the linked list that is LL1 from the linked list class. Next here I'll call insert empty LL1 dot insert empty. Now actually linked list is completely empty so I'm calling insert empty and I'll insert 10. So it will insert that to linked list and we are using print LL method to print the linked list. Nodes of the linked list. Here we can see 10 is inserted. Now if I again call this method and I'll pass 20 and if I execute this it will print this message linked list is not empty because when I first call this method it will insert the node. Next here we can see we are again calling this method. Now linked list is not empty because it contains node 10 right so it will print this message linked list is not empty. Alright in this way you can insert a node to the empty linked list. So that's it for now guys thank you for watching don't forget to subscribe to my channel I will meet you next class till then take care.