 Hello guys and welcome to Python Programming Tutorials by Amoleas Academy. We were discussing about data structures in Python programming language and in the previous tutorial we saw the different type of data structures that is the built-in data structure and user defined data structure. So first we will discuss about the built-in data structure. So today in this tutorial we will talk about the list and tuple. We already discussed about list and tuple previously in detail. Here I will explain about this concepts briefly. If you want detailed explanation I will give you the link of the previous video tutorial in the description box. You can go and check that. So first let's talk about the list. List is the collection of 0 or many elements separated by comma enclosed in the square brackets. So in the list the elements are enclosed within the square brackets and elements are separated by the comma and list can contain 0 or more than 0 elements. To create the list you can write like this. You can use the square brackets and inside that you can write the elements. So here 1, 2, 3 are called as elements. Another way to create the list is you can use the list constructor. List is used to store the sequence of various types of data. That means we can store the elements of different data types in the list. So we can store the integer data, float data, string data in a single list. Next list are ordered. List maintains the order of the elements. In other words the first element you add remains at the index 0. The second element you add remains at the index 1 and so forth. If you remove an element the rest of the elements remain in the same order. Although the elements after the removed element change their index position but the order will remain same. If the list has different order here we can see they are not equal. List elements can be accessed by index. List indexing is 0 based indexing. That means the first index of the list will be 0. Next will be 1 like that. The starting index of list is 0. So that's why it's called as 0 based indexing. And if you want to access any element from the list you can use the index of that element. You can use negative indexing also. Like positive indexing you can use the negative indexing also. List can be nested. So you can have list as the list element. You can have list inside the list. As I said in the list we can have the data of different data type. We can have list also as the element of the another list. So list can be nested. List are mutable. After creating a list you can modify that. You can insert any element or you can delete any element from the list. You can modify that. That's why lists are called as mutable. So there are different list methods. We already discussed about that. I will give you the link of that video in the description box. You can go and check that using that you can insert append or delete the element to the list. Next, lists are dynamic. When we add element to the list it will grow. When we delete the element it will shrink. Because list is mutable we can add the element or we can delete the element after creating that. Okay so this is about the list because we already discussed about this concept in detail. That's why I'm not explaining more about this. I will give you the link of previous videos in the description box. You can go and check that if you want detailed explanation. Next let's talk about the tuple. Touples are also towards the collection of different type of data. It is similar to the list but it has few different. Touples are comma separated elements enclosed within the parenthesis. In the list elements are enclosed within the square brackets but here in the tuple the elements are enclosed within the parenthesis. If you didn't use parenthesis also the value separated by the comma are called as tuple. So here we can see the example. And you can create the tuple using like this. You can take a variable and you can take the parenthesis inside that you can take the elements. Or you can use the tuple constructor also. You can create the empty tuple like this. But because we use parenthesis for grouping also in Python programming language. So we may face few ambiguities, the confusion. That is when I take a single element in the tuple. If you initialize like this here we can see the type of the tuple. It is not tuple. It is an integer value. Because I enclosed within the parenthesis it will not treat that as the tuple but it will treat that as a grouping operator. So to create a tuple with the single element include a comma here after the value. First difference is tuples are immutable. List is mutable right? It can be changed after creating the list we can modify it. But after creating the tuple we can't modify it. We can't insert the element or we can't delete the elements from the tuple. So tuples are mutable. So next see the similarities between the list and tuple. Which characters are similar between the list and tuple. tuple also stores the collection of 0 or more number of elements. And here the elements are separated by the comma. To access the element from the tuple we need to use the index. Here tuple indexing also 0 based. That is nothing but the first element index will be 0. Here also you can use the negative indexing. Tuple can also be nested. So you can use the tuple inside the tuple. So next why we need tuple when we have list. That is because tuple is faster than the list. And also sometimes you don't want data to be modified. If the values in the collection are meant to be remained constant for the life of the program using a tuple instead of list guards against accidental modification. Ok so this is about the list and tuple. If you want detailed explanation the video link is in the description box. In the next tutorial we'll discuss about set and dictionary. So that's it for now guys. Thank you for watching. Don't forget to subscribe to my channel. I will meet you in next class till then take care.