 Hello guys and welcome to Python programming tutorials by Amalia's Academy. We were discussing about data structures and data structure is a way to store and organize data so that it can be used efficiently. Consider in your room, if your clothes are well organized or arranged in your cupboard, then if you want to find any dress from that, you can find that easily. In other case, if clothes are not arranged properly, if your room is messy, some clothes are there in cupboard, some on bed, if your room is messy, then finding an item from that messy room is difficult, right? It will take more time and energy. In the same way, if data is well organized or arranged properly, then accessing that data as well as doing operation on that is easier. That's why we need data structures. You can place or arrange your clothes in different ways, right? You can arrange them based on the color. You can place all the black color outfit in one side and red color in one side like that. Or you can arrange them based on which type of cloth it is. You can arrange t-shirt one side, kurtis one side, pants one side like that. You will do the arrangement based on your requirement, right? In the same way, data can be arranged in different way. That's why we have different data structures like stack, queue, linkadlist, tree, graph. We have multiple data structure because we can arrange the data in different ways. Previously in this video series, we discussed about stack, queue and linkadlist and its implementation and all these three data structures comes under the linear data structure category. We have multiple data structures and we can divide this multiple data structure into two categories based on how data is arranged. If data is arranged linearly, those data structures comes under linear data structure. If data is arranged non-linearly, then that data structure comes under non-linear data structures. So we have two types in the data structure, linear and non-linear data structures. The data structure where data items are organized sequentially or linearly, that data structure is called as linear data structure. If it is not arranged linearly or sequentially, then that is called as non-linear data structure. And stack, queue, linkadlist data structure comes under the linear data structure category and tree and graph comes under the non-linear data structure. In linear data structure, the data items are traversed serially one after the another and all the items of the linear data structure can be traversed during a single run. But all the data items in a non-linear data structure may not be traversed during a single run. In non-linear data structure, the data items are not organized sequentially or linearly. So while discussing about tree and graph, we will see that. So this is about the linear and non-linear data structures. And the implementation of linear data structure is easier compared to non-linear data structures. And in the linear data structures, elements are attached one after the another. So when you are traversing, you can access only one element directly. And we have only one level in the linear data structure, but in the non-linear data structure, we will have multiple levels. So we will see that while discussing about tree and graph, because tree and graph comes under the non-linear data structure. So that's it for now guys. Thank you for watching. Don't forget to subscribe to my channel. I will meet you in next class. Till then, take care.