 Hello guys and welcome to Amolias Academy YouTube channel. We were discussing about tree data structure. Tree is a collection of entities called node and here every nodes are connected by edges. And it is a non-linear data structure. And also in tree we can see relationship between different nodes like parent-child relationship, sibling relationship etc. And in the previous tutorial we discussed about the properties and terminologies related to tree data structure. Next, we will talk about different types of tree data structure. The first type we are discussing here is general tree. General tree is a type of tree data structure where each node can have any number of child nodes. In other words, there are no limitation or restriction imposed on how many child node each node can have. Every node can have 0 child, 1 child, 2 child, 3, 4, 5 children. There is no limitation or restriction on the number of children. For example, this is a general tree. Here we can see this is the root node and this root node has 2 children, this node and this node. These 2 are siblings. And this node contains 2 children and this node contains 3 children. And this node contains 1 child node and this node and this node and this node contain 0 child nodes. As I said, there is no limitation or restriction on how many child nodes each node can have. Here we can see every node contains different number of child nodes. But in the next type of tree data structure we have a limitation or restriction on number of children each node can have. And the second type of tree data structure is called as binary trees. This is also a type of tree data structure where every node can have at most 2 children. Here we have limitation on how many child node each node can have. Here each node can have either 0 child, 1 child or 2 child. Not more than that. In a tree if a node contains 3 children or 4 children then that is not a binary tree. But this tree is not a binary tree because we can see this node contains 3 children so this is not a binary tree. In binary tree every node should contain only 0 child or 1 child or 2 children. This is the binary tree. Here you can see this node contains 2 child nodes. This node contains 2 child nodes and this node contains 1 child node. This node and this node contains 0 childs nodes. Here we can see every node contain either 0 child node 1 or 2 child node. So this is a binary tree. So we discussed about general tree and binary tree. Next, in binary tree we have different types. We can divide the binary tree into different types. So here in this series we will discuss 5 of them. So the first type in binary tree is full binary tree. And the second type is complete binary tree. And the third type is perfect binary tree. And the fourth type is balanced binary tree. And the last type is pathological or degenerate binary tree. Names are a bit confusing, right? Full, complete, perfect, balanced. Don't worry, we will discuss each type in detail. You will see the detailed explanation of this 5 binary type in the next class. So that's it for now guys. Thank you for watching. I will see you in the next class. Till then, take care.