 Hello guys and welcome to Amolias Academy YouTube channel. We were discussing about graph data structure and today in this tutorial we will discuss about different types of graphs. Graphs can be divided into different parts based on different factors. The first factor here we are discussing about is direction of edge. If in a graph all the edges are directed. If the direction of edge is mentioned then that graph is called as directed graph. If the direction is not mentioned then that graph is called as undirected graph. So based on the direction of the edge we have two types in graph. First one is directed graph and the one is undirected graph. An undirected graph is a graph in which all the edges are bidirectional. That is the edges do not point in any specific direction. A directed graph is a graph in which all the edges are unidirectional. It is pointing to a particular direction. If edges are pointing to a specific direction then that is called as directed graph. If edges does not have any direction on them then that graph is called as undirected graph. Okay let us see an example. First we have this graph. Here we can see edges are not directed. Here we can't see any direction on the edge. So here edges are bidirectional. That means it is an undirected graph. Here there is an edge from A to C as well as C to A. C to E, E to C. The edges are bidirectional here. But in this example here you can see edges are directed. Here we have an edge from B to A but we do not have any edge from A to B. You can see here right. Here edges are pointing to a specific direction. So that is why this is called as directed graph. I hope Namya clear with the undirected graph and directed graph. In the directed graph you can see the direction on the edge. And in the undirected graph edges are bidirectional. And here you can see set of vertices and edges. Alright. Next let us talk about the next factor which divides the graph into different part. This is weight. So based on this factor we can divide the graph into two part. One is weighted graph, another one is unweighted graph. In the weighted graph each edge is assigned with the cost or weight. This weight can be anything like length, cost or distance. It can be anything. If edge have a value then that graph is called as weighted graph. And if edges doesn't have any value then that is unweighted graph. So let's see an example. In this graph edges doesn't have any value. So this is an unweighted graph. Also this is an undirected graph. But here we can see in this graph we can see value on edge. Each edge have its own value. It is the cost or weight of the edge. So this is an weighted graph. So now if we are finding the path from B to E. We can have multiple path here and you can calculate the cost also. For example from B to E the cost is 2. If I take another path like this then 10 plus 3 that is 13 plus 4 17. This cost is 17. Alright so this is about the weighted and unweighted graph. The next type of graph is we can divide the graph into different part based on whether the graph contain cycle or not. If the graph contains cycle, then that is a cyclic graph. If it doesn't have any cycle in the graph then that graph is called as a cyclic graph. A graph is cyclic. If the graph contains a path that start from a vertex and ends at the same vertex that is called a cycle. If a graph contains a cycle, then that graph is called as a cyclic graph. it is doesn't then that is called as a cyclic graph. So, let's take an example. So, here we can see in this graph if I start from here B A D B. So, there is a cycle right. So, this is a cyclic graph. If I see this graph B A C E B. Here we have a path that start from a vertex and ends at the same vertex right. That's why this is called a cycle and this graph is called a cyclic graph. Now, in the previous tutorial I told you, tree is also a graph and tree is an acyclic graph because we can't form a cycle in tree right. That's why tree is an acyclic graph. So, here I'll show you an example. This is an acyclic graph. Based on different factors we divide the graph into different parts. One is based on the direction if every edge of a graph contains the direction then that graph is called as directed graph. If it is not then that is called as undirected graph. If every edge of the graph doesn't have any direction, if it is bi-directional then that graph is called as undirected graph. And based on the weight if every edge of a graph has value then that is called as weighted graph. If it doesn't has value then that is called as un-weighted graph and also if graph contains the cycle then that graph is called as cyclic graph if it doesn't then that is called as a cyclic graph and tree is a cyclic graph. Okay so this is about the different types of graph so that's it for now guys thank you for watching don't forget to subscribe to my channel I will meet you in next class till then take care.